Theory of Plate Tectonics
--Earth's Tectonic Plates
Although seismographs had been around for decades, during the 1950s and especially in the early 1960s, scientists set up seismograph networks to see if enemy nations were testing atomic bombs. Seismographs record seismic waves. Modern seismographs are sensitive enough to detect nuclear explosions. While watching for enemy atom bomb tests, the seismographs were also recording all of the earthquakes that were taking place around the planet. These seismic records could be used to locate an earthquake's epicenter, the point on Earth's surface directly above the place where the earthquake occurs. Earthquakes are associated with large cracks in the ground, known as faults. Rocks on opposite sides of a fault move in opposite directions.
Earthquakes are not spread evenly around the planet, but are found mostly in certain regions. In the oceans, earthquakes are found along mid-ocean ridges and in and around deep sea trenches. Earthquakes are extremely common all around the Pacific Ocean basin and often occur near volcanoes. The intensity of earthquakes and volcanic eruptions around the Pacific led scientists to name this region the Pacific Ring of Fire. Earthquakes are also common in the world's highest mountains, the Himalaya Mountains of Asia, and across the Mediterranean region.
Scientists noticed that the earthquake epicenters were located along the mid-ocean ridges, trenches and large faults that mark the edges of large slabs of Earth's lithosphere. They named these large slabs of lithosphere plates. The movements of the plates were then termed plate tectonics. A single plate can be made of all oceanic lithosphere or all continental lithosphere, but nearly all plates are made of a combination of both.
The lithosphere is divided into a dozen major and several minor plates. The plates' edges can be drawn by the connecting the dots that are earthquakes epicenters. Scientists have named each of the plates and have determined the direction that each is moving. Plates move around the Earth's surface at a rate of a few centimeters a year, about the same rate fingernails grow.
--How Plates Move
We know that seafloor spreading moves the lithospheric plates around on Earth's surface but what drives seafloor spreading? The answer is in lesson one of this chapter: mantle convection. At this point it would help to think of a convection cell as a rectangle or oval (see figure 4). Each side of the rectangle is a limb of the cell. The convection cell is located in the mantle. The base is deep in the mantle and the top is near the crust. There is a limb of mantle material moving on one side of the rectangle, one limb moving horizontally across the top of the rectangle, one limb moving downward on the other side of the rectangle, and the final limb moving horizontally to where the material begins to move upward again.
Now picture two convection cells side-by-side in the mantle. The rising limbs of material from the two adjacent cells reach the base of the crust at the mid-ocean ridge. Some of the hot magma melts and creates new ocean crust. This seafloor moves off the axis of the mid-ocean ridge in both directions when still newer seafloor erupts. The oceanic plate moves outward due to the eruption of new oceanic crust at the mid-ocean ridge.
Think about two cars moving around a parking lot. In what three ways can those cars move relative to each other? They can move away from each other, they can move toward each other, or they can slide past each other. These three types of relative motion also define the three types of plate boundaries: divergent plate boundaries where the two plates move away from each other, convergent plate boundaries where the two plates move towards each other, and transform plate boundaries where the two plates slip past each other.
What happens at plate boundaries depends on which direction the two plates are moving relative to each other. It also depends on whether the lithosphere on the two sides of the plate boundary is oceanic crust, continental crust, or one piece of each type. The type of plate boundary and the type of crust found on each side of the boundary determines what sort of geologic activity will be found there: earthquakes, volcanoes, or mountain building.
--Divergent Plate Boundaries
Plates move apart, or diverge, at mid-ocean ridges where seafloor spreading forms new oceanic lithosphere. At these mid-ocean ridges, lava rises, erupts, and cools. Magma cools more slowly beneath the lava mostly forming the igneous intrusive rock gabbro. The entire ridge system, then, is igneous. Earthquakes are also common at mid-ocean ridges since the movement of magma and oceanic crust result in crustal shaking. Although the vast majority of mid-ocean ridges are located deep below the sea, we can see where the MidAtlantic Ridge surfaces at the volcanic island of Iceland.
Although it is uncommon, a divergent plate boundary can also occur within a continent. This is called continental rifting. Magma rises beneath the continent, causing it to thin, break, and ultimately split up. As the continental crust breaks apart, oceanic crust erupts in the void. This is how the Atlantic Ocean formed when Pangaea broke up. The East African Rift is currently splitting eastern Africa away from the African continent.
Convergent Plate Boundaries
What happens when two plates converge depends on the types of crust that are colliding. Convergence can take place between two slabs of continental lithosphere, two slabs of oceanic lithosphere, or between one continental and one oceanic slab. Most often, when two plates collide, one or both are destroyed.
When oceanic crust converges with continental crust, the denser oceanic plate plunges beneath the continental plate. This process occurs at the oceanic trenches and is called subduction. The entire region is known as a subduction zone. Subduction zones have a lot of intense earthquakes and volcanic eruptions. The subducting plate causes melting in the mantle. The magma rises and erupts, creating volcanoes. These volcanoes are found in a line above the subducting plate. The volcanoes are known as a continental arc. The movement of crust and magma causes earthquakes. The Andes Mountains, which line the western edge of South America, are a continental arc. The volcanoes are the result of the Nazca plate subducting beneath the South American plate.
The volcanoes of northeastern California—Lassen Peak, Mount Shasta, and Medicine Lake volcano—along with the rest of the Cascade Mountains of the Pacific Northwest, are the result of subduction of the Juan de Fuca plate beneath the North American plate. Mount St. Helens, which erupted explosively on May 18, 1980, is the most famous and currently the most active of the Cascades volcanoes.
Sometimes the magma does not rise all the way through the continental crust beneath a volcanic arc. This usually happens if the magma is rich in silica. These viscous magmas form large areas of intrusive igneous rock, called batholiths, which may someday be uplifted to form a mountain range. The Sierra Nevada batholith cooled beneath a volcanic arc roughly 200 million years ago. Similar batholiths are likely forming beneath the Andes and Cascades today.
When two oceanic plates converge, the older, denser plate will sink beneath the other plate and plunge into the mantle. As the plate is pushed deeper into the mantle, it melts, which forms magma. As the magma rises it forms volcanoes in a line known as an island arc, which is a line of volcanic islands.
The Japanese, Indonesian, and Philippine islands are examples of island arc volcanoes. The volcanic islands are set off from the mainland in an arc shape as seen in this satellite image of Japan.
When two continental plates collide, they are too thick to subduct. Just like if you put your hands on two sides of a sheet of paper and bring your hands together, the material has nowhere to go but up! Some of the world's largest mountains ranges are created at continent-continent convergent plate boundaries. In these locations, the crust is too thick for magma to penetrate so there are no volcanoes, but there may be magma. Metamorphic rocks are common due to the stress the continental crust experiences. As you might think, with enormous slabs of crust smashing together, continent-continent collisions bring on numerous earthquakes.
The world's highest mountains, the Himalayas, are being created by a collision between the Indian and Eurasian plates. The Appalachian Mountains are the remnants of a large mountain range that was created when North America rammed into Eurasia about 250 million years ago.
Transform plate boundaries are seen as transform faults. At these earthquake faults, two plates move past each other in opposite directions. Where transform faults bisect continents, there are massive earthquakes. The world's most notorious transform fault is the 1,300 kilometer (800 mile) long San Andreas Fault in California. This is where the Pacific and North American plates grind past each other, sometimes with disastrous consequences.
California is very geologically active. A transform plate boundary creates the San Andreas Fault. A convergent plate boundary between an oceanic plate and a continental plate creates the Cascades volcanoes. Just offshore, the Juan de Fuca ridge is subducting beneath the North American plate at a divergent plate boundary.
Earth's Changing Surface
Geologists now know that Wegener was right when he said that the continents had once been joined into the supercontinent Pangaea and are now moving apart. Most of the geologic activity that we see on the planet today is due to the interactions of the moving plates. Where plates come apart at a divergent boundary, there is volcanic activity and small earthquakes. If the plates meet at a convergent boundary, and at least one is oceanic, there is a chain of volcanoes and many earthquakes. If both plates at a convergent boundary are continental, mountain ranges grow. If the plates meet at a transform boundary, there is a transform fault. These faults do not have volcanic activity but they have massive earthquakes.
If you look at a map showing the locations of volcanoes and earthquakes in North America, you will see that the plate boundaries are now along the western edge. This geologically active area makes up part of the Pacific Ring of Fire. California, with its volcanoes and earthquakes, is an important part of this region. The eastern edge of North America is currently mostly quiet, although mountain ranges line the area. If there is no plate boundary there today, where did those mountains come from?
Remember that Wegener used the similarity of the mountains in eastern North America, on the west side of the Atlantic, and the mountains in Great Britain, on the eastern side of the Atlantic, as evidence for his continental drift hypothesis. These mountains were formed at a convergent plate boundary as the continents that made up Pangaea came together. So about 200 million years ago these mountains were similar to the Himalaya today!
Before the continents collided they were separated by an ocean, just as the continents rimming the Pacific are now. That ocean crust had to subduct beneath the continents just as the oceanic crust around the Pacific is being subducted today. Subduction along the eastern margin of North America produced continental arc volcanoes. Ancient lava from those volcanoes can be found in the region.
Currently, Earth's most geologically active area is around the Pacific. The Pacific is shrinking at the same time the Atlantic is growing. But hundreds of millions of years ago, that was reversed: the Atlantic was shrinking as the Pacific was growing. What we've just identified is a cycle, known as the supercontinent cycle, which is responsible for most of the geologic features that we see and many more that are long gone. Scientists think that the creation and breakup of a supercontinent takes place about every 500 million years.
--Intraplate Activity
While it is true that most geological activity takes place along plate boundaries, some is found away from the edges of plates. This is known as intraplate activity. The most common intraplate volcanoes are above hotspots that lie beneath oceanic plates. Hotspot volcanoes arise because plumes of hot material that come from deep in the mantle rise through the overlying mantle and crust. When the magma reaches the plate above, it erupts, forming a volcano. Since the hotspot is stable, when the oceanic plate moves over it, and it erupts again, another volcano is created in line with the first. With time, there is a line of volcanoes; the youngest is directly above the hot spot and the oldest is furthest away. Recent research suggests that hotspots are not as stable as scientists once thought, but some larger ones still appear to be.
The Hawaiian Islands are a beautiful example of a chain of hotspot volcanoes. Kilauea volcano on the south side of the Big Island of Hawaii lies above the Hawaiian hot spot. The Big Island is on the southeastern end of the Hawaiian chain. Mauna Loa volcano, to the northwest, is older than Kilauea and is still erupting, but at a lower rate. Hawaii is the youngest island in the chain. As you follow the chain to the west, the islands get progressively older because they are further from the hotspot.
The chain continues into the Emperor Seamounts, which are so old they no longer reach above sea level. The oldest of the Emperor seamounts is about to subduct into the Aleutian trench off of Alaska; no one knows how many older volcanoes have already subducted. It's obvious from looking at the Emperor seamounts that the Pacific plate took a large turn. Radiometric dating has shown that turn to have taken place about 43 million years ago. The Hawaii hotspot may also have been moving southward during this time. Still, geologists can use some hotspot chains to tell not only the direction but the speed a plate is moving.
Hot spots are also found under the continental crust, although it is more difficult for the magma to make it through the thick crust and there are few eruptions. One exception is Yellowstone, which creates the activity at the Yellowstone hotspot. In the past, the hotspot produced enormous volcanic eruptions, but now its activity is best seen in the region's famous geysers.

