The hundreds of islands of the South Pacific are surrounded by the Pacific Ocean and make up the largest geographic area in the world.
The primary realm includes the island groups in the tropics between the Tropic of Cancer and the Tropic of Capricorn.
There has been little industrial development in the South Pacific.
Just as Antarctica has been divided up and claimed by other countries, though it was not colonized by them, most of the islands in the South Pacific were claimed or colonized by the imperial powers of Europe, Japan, or the United States.
The Pacific Theater of World War II was a battleground between the Japanese and American forces and had a large impact on the current conditions of many of the islands.
The United States has been a major player in the post–World War II domination and control of various island groups.
The Hawaiian Islands became the fiftieth US state in 1959.
Fiji is located in the eastern sector of Melanesia and has almost one million people.
During British colonial rule, thousands of workers from South Asia were brought in by the British to work on the sugar plantations.
The French and the British both colonized the island archipelago.
The cost of living in New York City is much higher than in Houston, Texas, for example.
Sure, per capita GDP increased substantially from 1970 to 2012, but is the average person in the U.S. economy really more than eight times better off in just 42 years?
If you glance at two index numbers like 107 and 110, you know automatically that the rate of inflation between the two years is about, but not quite exactly equal to, 3%.
By contrast, imagine that the price levels were expressed in absolute dollars of a large basket of goods, so that when you looked at the data, the numbers were $19,493.62 and $20,009.32.
The CPI is calculated by government statisticians at the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics based on the prices in a fixed basket of goods and services that represents the purchases of the average family of four.
By 1996, there were more than 40 million cellular phone subscribers in the United States—but cell phones were not yet part of the CPI basket of goods.
The parade of inventions has continued, with the CPI inevitably lagging a few years behind.
As former Chairman of the Federal Reserve Ben Bernanke noted in 1999 about the core inflation index, “It provide(s) a better guide to monetary policy than the other indices, since it measures the more persistent underlying inflation rather than transitory influences on the price level.” Bernanke also noted that it helps communicate that every inflationary shock need not be responded to by the Federal Reserve since some price changes are transitory and not part of a structural change in the economy.
Since the passage of the Social Security Indexing Act of 1972, the level of Social Security benefits increases each year along with the Consumer Price Index.
Also, Social Security is funded by payroll taxes, which are imposed on the income earned up to a certain amount—$113,700 in 2013.
In 1897, Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. declared in a famous line that “the duty to keep a contract at common law means a prediction that you must pay damages if you do not keep it.” 
The leading case, perhaps the most studied case, in all the common law is Hadley v. Baxendale, decided in England in 1854.
Joseph and Jonah Hadley were proprietors of a flour mill in Gloucester.
In May 1853, the shaft of the milling engine broke, stopping all milling.
An employee went to Pickford and Company, a common carrier, and asked that the shaft be sent as quickly as possible to a Greenwich foundry that would use the shaft as a model to construct a new one.
But through an error, the shaft was shipped by canal rather than by rail and did not arrive in Greenwich for seven days.
The Hadleys sued Joseph Baxendale, managing director of Pickford, for the profits they lost because of the delay.
In ordering a new trial, the Court of Exchequer ruled that Baxendale was not liable because he had had no notice that the mill was stopped:
Shirley MacLaine v. Twentieth Century-Fox Corporation, is a well-known case involving mitigation of damages.
According to Section 2-703(1): “Whether the pursuit of one remedy bars another depends entirely on the facts of the individual case.” UCC, Section 2-721, provides that neither demand for rescission of the contract in the case of misrepresentation or fraud, nor the return or rejection of goods, bars a claim for damages or any other remedy permitted under the UCC for nonfraudulent breach.
Lyndon Baines Johnson (August 27, 1908 – January 22, 1973), often referred to as LBJ, was an American politician who served as the 36th president of the United States from 1963 to 1969. 
Formerly the 37th vice president from 1961 to 1963, he assumed the presidency following the assassination of President John F. Kennedy. 
A Democrat from Texas, Johnson also served as a United States Representative and as the Majority Leader in the United States Senate. 
Born in a farmhouse in Stonewall, Texas, Johnson was a high school teacher and worked as a congressional aide before winning election to the US House of Representatives in 1937. 
He won a contested election to the US Senate in 1948 and was appointed to the position of Senate Majority Whip in 1951. 
He became the Senate Minority Leader in 1953 and the Senate Majority Leader in 1955. 
In domestic policy, Johnson designed the "Great Society" legislation to expand civil rights, public broadcasting, Medicare, Medicaid, aid to education, the arts, urban and rural development, public services and his "War on Poverty". 
In foreign policy, Johnson escalated American involvement in the Vietnam War. 
In 1964, Congress passed the Gulf of Tonkin Resolution, which granted Johnson the power to use military force in Southeast Asia without having to ask for an official declaration of war. 
The number of American military personnel in Vietnam increased dramatically, from 16,000 advisors in non-combat roles in 1963 to 525,000 in 1967, many in combat roles. 